MSC4195: MatrixRTC Transport using LiveKit Backend (#4195)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/4195-matrixrtc-livekit.md

Reviewer: I spoke with the Element VoIP team internally about a concern that was raised to me regarding the reliance on LiveKit as part of the Matrix spec.

[LiveKit](https://github.com/livekit/livekit) is a protocol and SFU implementation developed by a company with the same name, rather than an open standards body, and as such could develop in any number of ways depending on the company's motives. They also currently gate features such as Cascading SFUs behind their enterprise offering, whereas we would like to have something like this in Matrix (to support our federation model). There is a concern that reliance here stunts Matrix's ability to extend our own protocol, and beholds us to the whims of this other company.

However, there are several key points that the VoIP team shared that lessen the concern for me:

* They already had the same concern when building this solution.
* Matrix has the option to fork the LiveKit protocol ([Apache2](https://github.com/livekit/livekit/blob/master/LICENSE)) as it is today and build something more open if needed.
* They've spoken with the LiveKit team and they've said that Matrix is free to build its own Cascading SFU implementation on top of the open LiveKit protocol - they would not object to this. This would allow us to do away with the current central "elected" SFU per call approach we have today.

The reasoning for the "type" field in this MSC, rather than building a generic Matrix SFU API, was to allow building much smaller and simpler APIs for niche applications such as gaming server protocols - which don't need all the features of VoIP.

The reason behind choosing LiveKit's protocol instead of starting from scratch was a "hack" to get a good implementation working quickly. But it's not painting ourselves into a corner - what is being built now, even if LiveKit switches its license tomorrow, won't be lost in the process.

---

While I would like to see this concern addressed directly by the MSC author(s) (in the "Potential issues" section ideally), the authors acknowledged this MSC has been lagging behind the implementation and is in need of an update.

Where a per-participant key is used it is imported as the byte array input to the LiveKit key derivation function (which uses HKDF). The `index` field of the `m.rtc.encryption_keys` event is used as the key index for the key provider.

On receipt of the `m.rtc.encryption_keys` event the application can associate the received key with the LiveKit participant identity by calculating the
pseudonymous LiveKit participant identity as described above.

## Potential issues

## Alternatives

## Security considerations

To prevent abuse of SFU resources, during the backend service should validate the OpenID token as part of requests to `/sfu/get`.

The Server-Server API endpoint [/_matrix/federation/v1/openid/userinfo](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.11/server-server-api/#get_matrixfederationv1openiduserinfo)
can be used for this purpose.

An access control policy should be applied based on the result of the OpenID token validation. For example,
access might be restricted to users of a particular homeserver or to users with a specific role.

The homeserver restriction could be applied by checking the `matrix_server_name` field of the OpenID token before validating the token.

> The `room_id` could be validated too, and checking that the Matrix user from the OpenID token is a member of the room.

Reviewer 2: From my understanding there's no API that allows `room_id` validation. Without that implementing access control in a federated environment seems infeasible however.

Given that all members in a session use one SFU via `oldest_membership`, just validating against `matrix_server_name` (authenticated using TLS / OpenID) would require allowlisting any server that users might want to join from.

Ideally access control could check either for an allowlisted server or for an existing session with the oldest member being on an allowlisted server, gating an SFU to sessions being started by their "own" users.

Reviewer 2: The implementation in https://github.com/element-hq/lk-jwt-service/pull/67 does allow limiting creation of new SFU rooms based on servers in a given allowlist, but still allows arbitrary users to join

Reviewer 3: As you know this proposal now prescribes a "multi-SFU" approach in which clients publish media exclusively to their own homeserver's LiveKit SFU, never to any other SFUs. This makes it possible for a LiveKit Authorisation Service to only grant publishing permissions to users from a specific server allowlist. We're about 50/50 on whether the `roomCreate` permission really should remain restricted in addition to that, but both are recommended in the proposal for now. So all in all, I believe that resolves any unwanted resource usage issues.

I agree with you however that Matrix room membership should be a requirement for access to a LiveKit room. Otherwise there is a metadata leak: as an unprivileged user, I can leave a Matrix room and still connect to its corresponding LiveKit room on my homeserver's SFU, allowing me to see when others on my homeserver are holding MatrixRTC sessions in it.

I think that metadata leak is an avoidable design flaw, and I tentatively agree that having a CS API extension instead of the LiveKit Authorisation Service would be the best way to restructure this. Homeservers being coupled with LiveKit is something we were hoping to avoid, but I for one would prefer that over having to invent membership verification APIs.

Reviewer 4: The service was eliminated from the MSC and replaced with regular C-S and S-S APIs in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4195/commits/afdcf273e507152699ffb0cbfa3f364550f2b112. So this concern should be addressed now. Thanks all for participating in this discussion.

```json5
{
  "exp": 1726764439,
  "iss": "API2bYPYMoVqjcE",
  "nbf": 1726760839,
  "sub": "xyzABCDEF0123",    // member.id
  "video": {
    "canPublish": false,
    "canSubscribe": true,
    "room": "SHA256(!gIpOlaUSrXBmgtveWK:call.ems.host|m.call#ROOM)",
    "roomCreate": false,
    "roomJoin": true
  }
}
```

### End-to-end encryption

End-to-end encryption is mapped into the LiveKit frame level encryption mechanism described
[here](https://github.com/livekit/livekit/issues/1035).

Where a shared password is used by the application it is used as the `string` input to the LiveKit
key derivation function (which uses PBKDF2) and all participants use the same derived key for
encryption and decryption.

Where a per-participant key is used it is imported as the byte array input to the LiveKit key
derivation function (which uses HKDF). The `index` field of the `m.rtc.encryption_keys` event is
used as the key index for the key provider.

On receipt of the `m.rtc.encryption_keys` event the application can associate the received key with
the LiveKit participant identity by calculating the pseudonymous LiveKit participant identity as

> described above.

Reviewer 4: Looks like you got this to work by now so I'm resolving this.

Forwarding Units (SFUs).

In real-time communication environments, managing media streams among multiple participants can be
complex. This transport proposal uses a **Multi-SFU approach** where each participant publishes
their media directly to a LiveKit SFU, while others subscribe to streams they need. This removes the
need for an SFU election and preserves clear ownership of media.

Example for two participants from different homeservers A and B

```
      +------------------+
      |  Participant A   |
      |  (Matrix Client) |
      +------------------+
        |             ^
        |             |
        | publishes   | subscribes
        v             |
      +-------+  +-------+
      | SFU A |  | SFU B |
      +-------+  +-------+
        |             ^
        |             |
        | subscribes  | publishes
        v             |
      +------------------+
      |  Participant B   |
      |  (Matrix Client) |
      +------------------+
```

## Proposal

This MSC defines the **LiveKit RTC Transport**, which can appear as one of the **RTC Transports**
offered by a homeserver and being used as transport by clients.

> ### LiveKit room alias

Reviewer 5: The pipe operator is not a save delimiter.
Preferred:
convert to array obj -> serialise JSON

Reviewer 6: we should also apply this to the LiveKit participant alias

```json5
{
  "exp": 1726764439,
  "iss": "API2bYPYMoVqjcE",
  "nbf": 1726760839,
  "sub": "xyzABCDEF0123",    // member.id
  "video": {
    "canPublish": true,
    "canSubscribe": true,
    "room": "base64(SHA256(!gIpOlaUSrXBmgtveWK:call.ems.host|m.call#ROOM))",
    "roomCreate": true,
    "roomJoin": true
  }
}
```

Example for subscribing RTC data with restricted-access grant

```json5
{
  "exp": 1726764439,
  "iss": "API2bYPYMoVqjcE",
  "nbf": 1726760839,
  "sub": "xyzABCDEF0123",    // member.id
  "video": {
    "canPublish": false,
    "canSubscribe": true,
    "room": "base64(SHA256(!gIpOlaUSrXBmgtveWK:call.ems.host|m.call#ROOM))",
    "roomCreate": false,
    "roomJoin": true
  }
}
```

### End-to-end encryption

End-to-end encryption is mapped into the LiveKit frame level encryption mechanism described
[here](https://github.com/livekit/livekit/issues/1035).

Where a shared password is used by the application it is used as the `string` input to the LiveKit
key derivation function (which uses PBKDF2) and all participants use the same derived key for
encryption and decryption.

Where a per-participant key is used it is imported as the byte array input to the LiveKit key

> derivation function (which uses HKDF). The `index` field of the `m.rtc.encryption_keys` event is

Reviewer 7: It seems like multiple LiveKit SDKs (Rust, Flutter) only support using PBKDF2, so using HKDF here is going to limit compatibility with non-web based clients out of the box 

See: 
https://github.com/livekit/rust-sdks/issues/796
https://github.com/livekit/client-sdk-flutter/issues/974

Reviewer 8: This also affects the SDKs using Rust-FFI (like python and maybe others)

Reviewer 4: Looks like https://github.com/livekit/rust-sdks/issues/796 has since been resolved.

Reviewer 4: I've added this into the text as a potential issue with 3327a8962f974c3e31d4657813dc866724806aff.

Example response:
```http
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "jwt": "thejwt",
  "url": "wss://matrix-rtc.example.com/livekit/sfu"
}
```

#### Error responses

The LiveKit authorisation service MUST respond with appropriate HTTP status codes and structured
JSON bodies when an error occurs. All error responses MUST include a top-level `"errcode"` string
and a human-readable `"error"` description, following the conventions used in the 
[Matrix Client-Server API](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.11/client-server-api/#error-codes).

Common error responses:

| HTTP Status | `errcode` | Meaning / Recommended handling |
|--------------|------------|--------------------------------|
| `400 Bad Request` | `M_BAD_JSON` | The request body was malformed, missing required fields, or contained invalid values (e.g. missing `room_id`, `slot_id`, or `openid_token`). |
| `401 Unauthorized` | `M_UNAUTHORIZED` | The request could not be authorised. This response is used for all cases where the OpenID token is invalid, expired, could not be verified, or where the requested room or slot is unknown or inaccessible. Clients may attempt to refresh their OpenID token and retry. |

> | `429 Too Many Requests` | `M_LIMIT_EXCEEDED` | The client or homeserver has exceeded rate limits for LiveKit token requests. A `retry_after_ms` field SHOULD be included to indicate when retry is allowed. |

Author: `retry_after_ms` is now deprecated and the spec says a header should be used. So I suggest simplifying this:

```suggestion
| `429 Too Many Requests` | `M_LIMIT_EXCEEDED` | The client or homeserver has exceeded rate limits for LiveKit token requests. Please refer to the existing [spec](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#common-error-codes) for further details.|
```

> | `500 Internal Server Error` | `M_UNKNOWN` | An unexpected internal error occurred while generating the token. The client may retry after a short delay. |

Author: ```suggestion
| `403 Forbidden` | `M_USER_LIMIT_EXCEEDED` | The user has exceeded a configured quota or usage limit. Please refer to the existing [spec](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#common-error-codes) for further details.|
| `500 Internal Server Error` | `M_UNKNOWN` | An unexpected internal error occurred while generating the token. The client may retry after a short delay. |
```

Example Error Response:
```http
HTTP/1.1 401 Unauthorized
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "errcode": "M_UNAUTHORIZED",
  "error": "The request could not be authorised."
}
```
For privacy reasons, the authorisation service does not distinguish between invalid credentials,
unknown resources, or insufficient permissions. All such conditions result in a 401 Unauthorized
response with `M_UNAUTHORIZED`. This prevents clients from inferring the existence of specific
rooms, users, or slots based on error responses.

> The LiveKit authorisation service MAY include additional fields (such as `retry_after_ms` or

Author: ```suggestion
The LiveKit authorisation service MAY include additional fields (such as
```

their media directly to a LiveKit SFU, while others subscribe to streams they need. This removes the
need for an SFU election and preserves clear ownership of media.

Example for two participants from different homeservers A and B

```
      +------------------+
      |  Participant A   |
      |  (Matrix Client) |
      +------------------+
        |             ^
        |             |
        | publishes   | subscribes
        v             |
      +-------+  +-------+
      | SFU A |  | SFU B |
      +-------+  +-------+
        |             ^
        |             |
        | subscribes  | publishes
        v             |
      +------------------+
      |  Participant B   |
      |  (Matrix Client) |
      +------------------+
```

## Proposal

This MSC defines the **LiveKit RTC Transport**, which can appear as one of the **RTC Transports**
offered by a homeserver and being used as transport by clients.

### Canonical JSON Serialization

All uses of `JSON.serialize(...)` in this specification MUST use the canonical JSON encoding as 
defined by the [Matrix specification](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/appendices/#canonical-json).

> Since this MSC exclusively serializes arrays for hashing inputs, implementations MUST ensure:

Reviewer 4: Probably another dumb question: What made us choose arrays rather than objects? I wonder if it'll be easy to mix up the order of array elements in implementations whereas with objects it seems less likely that you'd assign a value to the wrong key. I suspect that using arrays might simplify the canonicalization process?

Reviewer 4: Clarified in a99151a49209c012bc79e0d741895fd9063ec299.

[MSC4143](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4143).

Clients declare the RTC Transport(s) they use to publish RTC data in their `m.rtc.member` state
event by adding a JSON object to the `rtc_transports` array.

Other clients in the same MatrixRTC slot discover and subscribe to each other’s media by inspecting
`m.rtc.member` events. Clients use this information to connect to the appropriate SFU and subscribe
to the published media.

Field Descriptions:
* `type` — required `string`: this MUST be `"livekit"`  
* `livekit_service_url` — required `string`: The URL of the service that issues JWT tokens for
  connecting this LiveKit SFU.

```
{
  // rest of the m.rtc.member event
  "rtc_transports": [
    {
      "type": "livekit",
      "livekit_service_url": "https://matrix-rtc.example.com/livekit/jwt",
    }
  ]
}
```

### LiveKit SFU Authorisation Service

LiveKit SFUs require a JWT `access_token` to be provided when 
[connecting to the WebSocket](https://docs.livekit.io/reference/internals/client-protocol/#WebSocket-Parameters).  
This section standardises the method by which a MatrixRTC application obtains the LiveKit JWT

> token. A high level overview is depicted int he following diagram

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
token. A high level overview is depicted in the following diagram
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant U as 🧑 User
    participant M as 🏢 Matrix Homeserver

>     participant A as 🔐 MatrixRTC Authorisation Service

Reviewer 4: The service is specific to LiveKit. So it might be good to clarify that it is not a generic MatrixRTC Auth Service.

```suggestion
    participant A as 🔐 LiveKit Authorisation Service
```

    participant L as 📡 LiveKit SFU

    U->>M: Requests OpenID token
    M-->>U: Returns OpenID token
    U->>A: Sends OpenID token & room request
    A->>M: Validates token via OpenID API
    M-->>A: Confirms user identity
    A->>A: Generates LiveKit JWT
    A->>L: (If full-access user) Create room if missing
    A-->>U: Returns LiveKit JWT
    U->>L: Connects to room using JWT
```

#### Prerequisites

* The `livekit_service_url` for the MatrixRTC backend has been discovered from one of the methods above.  
* The Matrix client has obtained an OpenID token from the [Client-Server API](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.11/client-server-api/#openid).

> #### Request

Reviewer 4: As discussed with @fkwp, we'll probably need a separate endpoint for delegating management of the delayed leave event.

First of all getting a token and delegating the leave are two separate concerns.

Secondly, there is a potential race condition. The leave event cannot be scheduled without sending the join because of the `m.relates_to` link between both. The LiveKit room will only be created when `get_token` is called. If a user on homeserver A posts their join event and then a user on homeserver B tries to connect to the first user's SFU before the user has finished calling `get_token`, then the second user will run into an error: the room doesn't yet exist and being a remote user, they have no privileges to create it.

The separate endpoint can have the same parameters as the current `/get_token` and the delay parameters in the current `/get_token` can be dropped.

Reviewer 4: New endpoint introduced in 18aee18387ddb15db712f805f6fa0110985f0c49.

The JWT token is obtained by making a `POST` request to the `/get_token` endpoint of the LiveKit service.

The `Content-Type` of the request is `application/json` and the JSON body contains the following
fields:
  * `room_id` — required `string`: the Matrix room ID where the `m.rtc.member` event is present.  
  * `slot_id` — required `string`: the slot ID from the `m.rtc.member` event.  
  * `openid_token` — required `object`: the verbatim OpenID token response obtained from the 
    [Client-Server API](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.11/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3useruseridopenidrequest_token).  
  * `member` — required `object`: the contents of the `member` field from the `m.rtc.member` event.
  * `delay_id` — optional `string`: the delayed event id of the MatrixRTC member leave event.
  * `delay_timeout` — optional `string`: number of positive non-zero milliseconds the homeserver
    should wait before sending the MatrixRTC member leave event

>   * `delay_cs_api_url` — optional `string`: The Matrix client-server API as used by the client

Reviewer 4: We should clarify why this is needed. I assume it is to spare the authorisation service the [`.well-known` discovery](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#well-known-uris).

@richvdh this recommendation presumably originated from your feedback. Did you have anything else in mind here apart from avoiding the well-known look-up?

I think the service would still have to fetch `/versions` to be sure which version of the delayed events API the server supports.

For comparison, when [registering pushers](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3pushersset), we pass in the full path to the gateway's endpoint. This includes the `/v1/` component though, which I think doesn't make it very flexible.

Reviewer 9: > [@richvdh](https://github.com/richvdh) this recommendation presumably originated from your feedback. Did you have anything else in mind here apart from avoiding the well-known look-up?

Sorry, I have no memory of anything that might be related.

It might be relevant that it's not mandatory for servers to offer a `/.well-known/matrix/client`? There is, in general, no way to know how to access a server's CS-API from its server_name.

Reviewer 4: Thanks, that makes sense. I clarified it in the proposal text as part of 18aee18387ddb15db712f805f6fa0110985f0c49.

Example request where `livekit_service_url` is `https://matrix-rtc.example.com/livekit/jwt`:
```http
POST /livekit/jwt/get_token HTTP/1.1
Host: matrix-rtc.example.com
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "room_id": "!tDLCaLXijNtYcJZEey:example.com",
  "slot_id": "the_id",
  "openid_token": {
    "access_token": "FPkexLLvKbAHKclQhpvgfWxx",
    "expires_in": 3600,
    "matrix_server_name": "matrix.example.com",
    "token_type": "Bearer"
  },
  "member": {
    "id": "xyzABCDEF10123",
    "claimed_device_id": "DEVICEID",
    "claimed_user_id": "@user:matrix.example.com"
  },
  "delay_id": "1234567890",   // optional 

>   "delay_timeout": "7200000"  // optional (2 hours)

Reviewer 4: As all the other optional parameters are listed.

```suggestion
  "delay_timeout": "7200000",  // optional (2 hours)
  "delay_cs_api_url": "https://matrix-client.matrix.org/" // optional
```

reset while the client remains connected with sufficient headroom (e.g., 80% of `delay_timeout`) to
 ensure the reset occurs well before `delay_timeout` expires. If the SFU detects that the client has
disconnected before the timer is reset, the Authorisation Service MUST trigger the `disconnect`
event by sending the following request to the homeserver:
```http
POST /_matrix/client/v1/delayed_events/{delay_id}/send HTTP/1.1
Host: matrix-rtc.example.com
Content-Type: application/json

{}
```

This ensures that the MatrixRTC membership state remains accurate and consistent, even in the
presence of network interruptions or client crashes.

Implementations SHOULD verify support for delayed events by querying the client’s homeserver
`_matrix/client/versions` endpoint. If the homeserver does not advertise support for delayed events,
the SFU authorisation request MUST be rejected with the error code `M_UNSUPPORTED` and error message
`MatrixRTC membership lifecycle delegation failed: homeserver does not support delayed events.`.

Implementations MAY retry failed delayed event POST requests using an exponential backoff strategy

> in the event of transient network failures. However, retry attempts MUST cease once either the

Reviewer 4: As this could also happen for other reasons such as rate limits, I wonder if this should be SHOULD rather than MAY?

Reviewer 4: On second thought this seems ok as it speaks of transient network failures specifically.

configured `delay_timeout` has elapsed or the maximum sticky duration of one hour for the delayed

> event has been reached, whichever occurs first.

Reviewer 4: Possibly a dumb question but what is the rationale behind the maximum sticky duration cut-off? The stickyness lifetime only starts once the delayed event has actually been sent. So I think that cannot possibly happen before the delay_timeout has elapsed?

Reviewer 6: it is about the previous sent sticky event which is either the join event or the cont. event. That times out after 1h

Reviewer 4: Ah, I see. In that case we should probably clarify the text because it says "sticky duration of one hour _for the delayed event_".

I'm now curious from where we measure the 1h though. The authorization service doesn't see the join / continue events. Do we just take 1h from the latest known scheduling time of the delayed leave event as a best effort guess?

Reviewer 4: Discussed out of band: The `min(delay_timeout, 1h)` seems sensible for awaiting the initial connect and triggering the sending on disconnect but not for the restart operation. I think we should specify "MUST stop at `delay_timeout`" and "SHOULD stop after 1h (being the maximum sticky duration)".

Reviewer 4: Clarified in a7252d5f3834cc40504da2f46af418868046ed6e.

  Cascading SFUs that might otherwise require protocol changes.

In summary, this MSC’s reliance on LiveKit represents a practical implementation path rather than a
long-term commitment to a specific third-party protocol. The current design remains open to future
evolution toward a Matrix-native or jointly standardized MatrixRTC transport.

## Alternatives

## Security considerations

### Resource usage

To prevent abuse of SFU resources, the LiveKit Authorisation service should validate the OpenID
token as part of requests to `/get_token`.

The Server-Server API endpoint
[/\_matrix/federation/v1/openid/userinfo](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.11/server-server-api/#get_matrixfederationv1openiduserinfo)
can be used for this purpose.

An access control policy should be applied based on the result of the OpenID token validation. For
example, access might be restricted to users of a particular homeserver or to users with a specific
role.

The homeserver restriction could be applied by checking the `matrix_server_name` field of the OpenID
token before validating the token.

The Matrix `room_id` could be validated too, and checking that the Matrix user from the OpenID token

> is a member of the room.

Reviewer 4: Is this currently possible with the protocol? It seems like this may require a proprietary extension of both the home server and the authorisation service.

Reviewer 4: Trying to clarify this.

```suggestion
The Matrix `room_id` could be validated too, and checking that the Matrix user from the OpenID token
is a member of the room. This would require a dedicated way for the LiveKit Authorisation Service to
perform these checks via the homeserver though.
```

semantics.

This proposal defines a new [MSC4143](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4143)
compliant MatrixRTC Transport using [LiveKit](https://github.com/livekit/livekit) Selective
Forwarding Units (SFUs).

In real-time communication environments, managing media streams among multiple participants can be
complex. This transport proposal uses a **Multi-SFU approach** where each participant publishes
their media directly to a LiveKit SFU, while others subscribe to streams they need. This removes the
need for an SFU election and preserves clear ownership of media.

Example for two participants from different homeservers A and B

```
      +------------------+
      |  Participant A   |
      |  (Matrix Client) |
      +------------------+
        |             ^
        |             |
        | publishes   | subscribes
        v             |
      +-------+  +-------+
      | SFU A |  | SFU B |
      +-------+  +-------+
        |             ^
        |             |
        | subscribes  | publishes
        v             |
      +------------------+
      |  Participant B   |
      |  (Matrix Client) |
      +------------------+
```

## Proposal

> This MSC defines the **LiveKit RTC Transport**, which can appear as one of the **RTC Transports**
> offered by a homeserver and being used as transport by clients.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
This MSC defines the **LiveKit RTC Transport**, which can appear as one of the **RTC Transports**
offered by a homeserver and being used as transport by clients, as per [MSC4519](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4519).
```

serialization defined [above](#canonical-json-serialization).

For improved metadata protection, the `livekit_alias` SHOULD be derived as
`base64(SHA256(JSON.serialize([room_id, slot_id, truly_random_bits])))`, where the `truly random bits`
are maintained by the server.

The resulting value is opaque to the MatrixRTC application. Within the LiveKit namespace, the
`livekit_alias` uniquely represents a MatrixRTC slot. Participants from the same Matrix deployment
(using the same SFU to publish their media) are considered to use the same `livekit_alias` in order
to limit the number of active LiveKit SFU connections. 

The `livekit_alias` is shared with clients as part of their JWT token issued by the server.

### Transport type: `livekit`

This section defines the JSON format for the LiveKit SFU Transport, covering both homeserver-side
advertisement and client-side consumption.

#### Transport Advertisement (homeserver)

The mechanism for advertising available RTC transports by homeservers is already defined in
[MSC4143](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4143).

The homeserver announces available LiveKit Transport as a JSON object with the following fields:

> * `type` — required `string`: this MUST be `livekit`  

Reviewer 3: MSC4143 says that `type` "MUST follow the [Common Namespaced Identifier Grammar](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.16/appendices/#common-namespaced-identifier-grammar) but without the namespacing requirements." Should we change it to `m.livekit`?

Reviewer 4: See also https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4519#discussion_r3682414975.

Reviewer 4: The proposal now refers to the transport as `m.livekit`.

```

The JWT token is obtained by making an authenticated `POST` request to a new Client-Server endpoint
`/_matrix/client/v1/rtc/livekit/get_token`.

The `Content-Type` of the request is `application/json` and the JSON body contains the following
fields:

  * `server_name` — `string`: the [server name](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.19/appendices/#server-name)
    of the `m.rtc.member` event's `sender`. Defaults to the server's own server name if omitted.
  * `room_id` — required `string`: the Matrix room ID where the `m.rtc.member` event is present. 
  * `slot_id` — required `string`: the slot ID from the `m.rtc.member` event.
  * `member` — required `object`: the contents of the `member` field from the `m.rtc.member` event.

```http
POST /_matrix/client/v1/rtc/livekit/get_token HTTP/1.1

{
  "server_name": "example.com",
  "room_id": "!tDLCaLXijNtYcJZEey:example.com",
  "slot_id": "the_id",
  "member": {
    "id": "xyzABCDEF10123",
    "claimed_device_id": "DEVICEID"
  }
}
```

Upon receiving the request, the server verifies that the requesting user is joined to the room
identified by `room_id`. If the user is not joined, the request MUST be rejected with HTTP 401 /

> `M_UNAUTHORIZED`.

Reviewer 11: Why `401 / M_UNAUTHORIZED`? Would `403 / M_FORBIDDEN` not be more consistent (and correct)?

Reviewer 4: Yeah, I think you're right.

> If `server_name` is the server's own name, it obtains a token from its own SFU and if successful

Reviewer 11: How does this work if the server has multiple SFUs configured? The `transports` object in the `m.rtc.member` event referenced by `slot_id` also seemingly has the option for multiple SFUs to be published, so what would be contacted in this case? the first one?

Reviewer 4: Yeah, that doesn't work anymore currently. If we want to enable this, I think we'll need to introduce some identifier next to transports. So `/transports` would give you e.g. `[{"type": "livekit", "id": "sfu1"}, {"type": "livekit", "id": "sfu2"}]` and then we'd need to thread those `id`s through the system.

descriptions that are suitable for client display or logging. Specifically:
* Validation or authorisation failures MUST NOT reveal information about whether a particular Matrix
  user, device, or room exists.
* Server-side or federation validation errors (for example, OpenID token verification failures)
  SHOULD be reported as `M_UNAUTHORIZED` or `M_FORBIDDEN` without including internal validation
  results or upstream responses.
* Detailed diagnostic information (e.g., reasons for policy rejection, internal stack traces, or
  upstream HTTP responses) MUST NOT be exposed to clients, but MAY be logged on the server side for
  audit and debugging purposes.
* If rate limiting is applied, the inclusion of a numeric `retry_after_ms` value is acceptable, but
  other details of rate limiting policy SHOULD NOT be exposed.

This ensures that error responses remain useful for clients while preventing potential metadata
leakage about users, rooms, or federation trust relationships.

## Unstable prefix

Assuming that this is accepted at the same time as
[MSC4143](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4143) no unstable prefix is

> required as these fields  will only be accessed via some other unstable prefix.

Reviewer 11: What about the unstable route prefix for the various routes introduced by this proposal? There's no clear unstable identifier between this proposal and MSC4143 that would be suitable in place of the stable route versions

Reviewer 4: I think this only relates to the `livekit` type identifier. There's some clearer wording in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4519/changes#diff-97ba5c9bb66bce325e38ad78883785afab74783031d02122c9ecce2caa25124aR100-R104. The endpoints added in this proposal should receive regular unstable prefixes. Those are currently missing from the proposal.

## Dependencies

This MSC builds on [MSC4143](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4143) (which
at the time of writing has not yet been accepted into the spec).

> 

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion

This MSC additionally requires [MSC4519](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4519)
to be accepted.

```

    should wait before sending the MatrixRTC member leave event
  * `delay_cs_api_url` — required `string`: The Matrix client-server API as used by the client. This
    is required because publishing the [.well-known document](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#well-known-uris)
    for auto-discovery is not mandatory. Hence, there is, in general, no way to know how to access a
    server's CS-API given its server name.

Example request where `livekit_service_url` is `https://matrix-rtc.example.com/livekit/jwt`:
```http
POST /livekit/jwt/delegate_delayed_leave HTTP/1.1
Host: matrix-rtc.example.com
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "room_id": "!tDLCaLXijNtYcJZEey:example.com",
  "slot_id": "the_id",
  "openid_token": {
    "access_token": "FPkexLLvKbAHKclQhpvgfWxx",
    "expires_in": 3600,
    "matrix_server_name": "matrix.example.com",
    "token_type": "Bearer"
  },
  "member": {
    "id": "xyzABCDEF10123",
    "claimed_device_id": "DEVICEID",
    "claimed_user_id": "@user:matrix.example.com"
  },
  "delay_id": "1234567890",
  "delay_timeout": "7200000",
  "delay_cs_api_url": "https://matrix-client.matrix.org/"
}
```

> ##### Successful response

Reviewer 4: We should clarify what happens when the user delegates management of another delayed event for the same `room_id`, `slot` and `member`.

Reviewer 4: Added the highlander principle in 050858e02e63f8eb64f2b3c0dd0f5e5e6ff4f9c8.

The `Content-Type` of the request is `application/json` and the JSON body contains the following
fields:
  * `room_id` — required `string`: the Matrix room ID where the `m.rtc.member` event is present.  
  * `slot_id` — required `string`: the slot ID from the `m.rtc.member` event.  
  * `openid_token` — required `object`: the verbatim OpenID token response obtained from the 
    [Client-Server API](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.11/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3useruseridopenidrequest_token).  
  * `member` — required `object`: the contents of the `member` field from the `m.rtc.member` event.

Example request where `livekit_service_url` is `https://matrix-rtc.example.com/livekit/jwt`:
```http
POST /livekit/jwt/get_token HTTP/1.1
Host: matrix-rtc.example.com
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "room_id": "!tDLCaLXijNtYcJZEey:example.com",
  "slot_id": "the_id",
  "openid_token": {
    "access_token": "FPkexLLvKbAHKclQhpvgfWxx",
    "expires_in": 3600,
    "matrix_server_name": "matrix.example.com",
    "token_type": "Bearer"
  },
  "member": {
    "id": "xyzABCDEF10123",
    "claimed_device_id": "DEVICEID",

>     "claimed_user_id": "@user:matrix.example.com"

Reviewer 4: The service should verify that this matches with the MXID in the OpenID token.

Reviewer 4: Added in a9c98da061f77bc02139ea7191478aa625a848ef.

    M-->>A: Confirms user identity
    A-->>U: Confirms delegation
    A->>M: Renews delayed disconnect event
    U->>U: Looses connection
    L->>A: Notifies about participant disconnect
    A->>M: Triggers sending of disconnect event
```

##### Request

The delegation is carried out by making a `POST` request to the `/delegate_delayed_leave` endpoint
of the LiveKit service.

The `Content-Type` of the request is `application/json` and the JSON body contains the following
fields:
  * `room_id` — required `string`: the Matrix room ID where the `m.rtc.member` event is present.  
  * `slot_id` — required `string`: the slot ID from the `m.rtc.member` event.  
  * `openid_token` — required `object`: the verbatim OpenID token response obtained from the 
    [Client-Server API](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.11/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3useruseridopenidrequest_token).  
  * `member` — required `object`: the contents of the `member` field from the `m.rtc.member` event.
  * `delay_id` — required `string`: the delayed event id of the MatrixRTC member leave event.
  * `delay_timeout` — required `string`: number of positive non-zero milliseconds the homeserver

>     should wait before sending the MatrixRTC member leave event

Reviewer 4: We should recommend sensible values for this. A very short timeout, for instance, would cause the service to do an unnecessary amount of `/reset` requests.

Reviewer 4: Added in 7ccda7d7cbbd80ba5819fd63511d6b076654ef47.

Upstream implementation efforts such as [livekit/rust-sdks#796](https://github.com/livekit/rust-sdks/issues/796)
will be required to close these gaps.

## Alternatives

### String concatenation of hashing inputs

Instead of using canonical JSON, the hashing inputs could be concatenated with a suitable delimiter
such as `|`. This is prone to delimiter injection, however. As an example, the inputs `("a|b", "c")`
and `("a", "b|c")` both produce the concatenation `"a|b|c"` and, hence, the same hash. Using JSON
arrays and Canonical JSON serialisation avoids this problem. Since the Canonical JSON serialisation
of string arrays is trivial, this doesn't meaningfully increase implementation complexity.

### JSON objects as hashing inputs

Instead of JSON arrays, JSON objects could be used for the hashing inputs. This would reduce the
chances of accidentally using the wrong order of array elements. On the downside, however, the
Canonical JSON serialisation of objects is significantly more complex than for arrays. Overall,
this would likely result in a higher chance of implementation errors.

> ### Combination of token request and delegation

Reviewer 4: Additionally, this also spares us having to handle the case where token generation succeeds but delayed event delegation fails in a single endpoint.

Reviewer 4: Clarified in ca058dd02155645f5a471f0db73f1af359f8da28.

subscribe │                         discover SFU │          │ publish
          │                get SFU authorisation │          │
          │                                      │          │
          │       ┌──────────────────────────────┴──┐       │
          └──────▶│            Client B             ├───────┘
                  └─────────────────────────────────┘
```

[MSC4143]: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4143
[LiveKit]: https://github.com/livekit/livekit

## Proposal

### Discovering and announcing transports

A new transport type `m.livekit` is introduced. Homeservers that support this transport announce it
to clients by including a dedicated object in the response of the `/_matrix/client/v1/rtc/transports`
endpoint from [MSC4519]. The object has the following schema:

- `type` (required, string): The transport's type identifier. MUST be `m.livekit`.
- `url` (required, string): The SFU's WebSocket URL. Clients use this URL to connect to the SFU
  via one of LiveKit's [client SDKs].

Below is an example of a response from `/_matrix/client/v1/rtc/transports`:

```json5
{
  "transports": [{
    "type": "m.livekit",

>     "url": "ws://livekit.example.com"

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    "url": "wss://livekit.example.com"
```

Reviewer 6: I think we should wherever we can point to the TLS version of protocols

Reviewer 4: Fixed all in 7d0913c2afaac39dd4a367479a49c2cc06017fe0.

  }]
}
```

Once a client decides to publish media under a discovered transport, it includes the same object

> in the `transports` array of its respective `m.rtc.member` event. This gives other clients in the

Reviewer 6: do we need to split it into `published` and `can_subscribe`? or is this sufficiently explained in MSC4519

Reviewer 4: Yes, good point. Fixed in e9d8fd50eb0a4c9dfc19027c6d50c6d257cf183e.

same RTC slot, the information required to subscribe to the published media.

Below is an example of an appropriate membership event:

```json5
{
  "type": "m.rtc.member",
  "content": {
    "slot_id": "the_id",
    "member": {
      "id": "xyzABCDEF10123",
      "membership": "join"
    },
    "application": {
      ...
    },
    "transports": {
      "published": [{
        "type": "m.livekit",
        "url": "ws://livekit.example.com"
      }],
      "can_subscribe": [ "m.livekit" ]
    },
    "sticky_key": "xyzABCDEF10123"
  },
  ...
}
```

[MSC4519]: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4519
[client SDKs]: https://docs.livekit.io/transport/sdk-platforms/

### Mapping MatrixRTC members to LiveKit

LiveKit encapsulates RTC sessions in so called [LiveKit rooms]. Within a LiveKit room,

> [LiveKit participants] can publish and subscribe to RTC data streams through a WebSocket

Reviewer 6: the WebSocket is the signaling connection. The actual media data is transmitted over WebTransport connection(s)

Reviewer 6: LiveKit encapsulates RTC sessions in so-called [LiveKit rooms]. Within a room, [LiveKit participants] join using WebSocket signaling connection that is guarded with an access token. The actual publishing and subscribing of RTC media data streams happens over WebRTC.

Reviewer 4: Fixed in 2b2396a5e9d643ce709869fb4818a2554978dcbf.

connection that is guarded with an access token. A LiveKit room is identified by a unique
room "name" string while a LiveKit participant is identified by a unique "identity" string.
These LiveKit primitives need to be mapped to the `m.rtc.member` events for MatrixRTC members
from [MSC4143].

#### LiveKit room names

LiveKit room names are derived by homeservers and shared with clients as part of the
LiveKit access token issued by the homeserver (see [below]). To ensure a baseline of
pseudonymity and avoid exposing unnecessary metadata to the SFU, the derivation is
performed using the following steps:

1. Construct a JSON array containing the `room_id` and `slot_id` of the `m.rtc.member`
   event (in that precise order).
1. Perform a [Canonical JSON] serialization of the array.
1. Take the UTF-8 encoding of the canonicalization output and hash it with SHA-256.
1. Encode the result using [unpadded base64].

```
livekit_room_name = Base64( SHA256( Canonicalize( [ room_id, slot_id ] ) ) )
```

This procedure ensures that each MatrixRTC slot unambiguously maps to one LiveKit room on

> each involved SFU. As a result, the number of WebSocket connections required to participate

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
each involved SFU. As a result, the number of LiveKit (WebSocket plus WebRTC PeerConnection) connections required to participate
```

Reviewer 4: e0b97404e02734fa9408d239115bfbf48cb61a01

in an RTC session scales with the number of participating SFUs which should commonly mean
the number of participating homeservers. This is much more efficient for clients compared to

> using separate LiveKit rooms per MatrixRTC member where the number of required WebSocket

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
using separate LiveKit rooms per MatrixRTC member where the number of required LiveKit
```

Reviewer 4: ee6b17120f0f6bfc7be2421acb96ccdec8465f10

connections would scale with the number of session members.

For improved metadata protection, servers MAY add a `salt` generated from a cryptographically
secure random number generator to the input JSON array when deriving LiveKit room names.

```
livekit_room_name = Base64( SHA256( Canonicalize( [ room_id, slot_id, salt ] ) ) )
```

The value of `salt` MUST be persisted on the server and SHOULD be rotated once all
LiveKit participants have left the LiveKit room. This ensures that a different LiveKit
room is used for the next MatrixRTC session in the same slot and further reduces the
amount of metadata exposed to the SFU.

#### LiveKit participant identities

LiveKit participant identities are derived by both homeservers and clients. Homeservers require
the identity to generate LiveKit access tokens (see [below]). Clients use the identity to map
MXIDs to LiveKit participants. To avoid exposing unnecessary metadata to the SFU, the derivation
process uses the following steps:

> 1. Construct a JSON array containing the `sender` and `member.id` properties from the `m.rtc.member`

Reviewer 6: that is the matrix id?

Reviewer 4: `sender` contains the MXID, yes.

- `url` (required, string): The WebSocket URL of the LiveKit SFU for which a token is requested.
- `room_id` (required, string): The room ID where the associated `m.rtc.member` event (see below) was sent.
- `slot_id` (required, string): The contents of the `slot_id` property of the associated `m.rtc.member` event.
- `member_id` (required, string): The `member.id` property of the associated `m.rtc.member` event.

When requesting a token for publishing, the associated `m.rtc.member` event is the member's own event.
The client uses its own server name for `server_name` and the WebSocket URL discovered from
`/_matrix/client/v1/rtc/transports` for `url`.

If, on the other hand, the token is requested for subscribing, the associated `m.rtc.member` event is
another member's event. In this case, the client derives the value for `server_name` from the `sender`
of that event and takes `url` from the respective `transports` array element in the event.

Below is an example of a token request for the `m.rtc.membership` example given further up.

```http
POST /_matrix/client/v1/rtc/livekit/get_token

{
  "server_name": "example.com",

>   "url": "ws://livekit.example.com",

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  "url": "wss://livekit.example.com",
```

  
    L->>H: Participant disconnected webhook
    H->>H: Trigger sending<br>leave event
    deactivate H
```

Clients delegate delayed leave events to their homeserver by `POST`ing to a new authenticated endpoint
`/_matrix/client/v1/rtc/livekit/delegate_delayed_leave`. The body of the request contains a JSON
object with the following schema:

- `room_id` (required, `string`): The room ID in which the delayed `m.rtc.member` event was scheduled.
- `slot_id` (required, `string`): The contents of the `slot_id` property of the `m.rtc.member` event.
- `member_id` (required, `string`): The `member.id` property of the `m.rtc.member` event.
- `delay_id` (required, `string`): The delayed event ID obtained when scheduling the `m.rtc.member` event.

Below is an example of a request:

```http
POST /_matrix/client/v1/rtc/livekit/delegate_delayed_leave

{
  "room_id": "!tDLCaLXijNtYcJZEey:example.com",
  "slot_id": "the_id",
  "member_id": "id",
  "delay_id": "1234567890"
}
```

When scheduling delayed events that are meant to be delegated, clients SHOULD use a delay of at least
1 hour. This avoids unnecessarily frequent restarts of the delayed event. Servers MAY reject delegation

> requests with HTTP 400 / `M_INVALID_PARAM` when the delegated event has a lower timeout.

Reviewer 6: should we ref here the delayed events MSC?

Reviewer 4: fac2da6cb125324a5af4d08bf916a552f227be6d

[Apache 2.0 License]: https://github.com/livekit/livekit/blob/master/LICENSE

## Alternatives

### Canonical JSON variations

The procedures for deriving LiveKit room names and LiveKit participant identities involve [Canonical JSON].
As an alternative, the hashing inputs could be concatenated with a suitable delimiter such as `|`. This
is prone to delimiter injection, however. As an example, the inputs `("a|b", "c")` and `("a", "b|c")`
both produce the concatenation `"a|b|c"` and, hence, the same hash. Using JSON arrays and Canonical JSON
avoids this problem. Since the Canonical JSON serialisation of string arrays is trivial, this also doesn't
meaningfully increase implementation complexity.

Furthermore, instead of JSON arrays, JSON objects could be used for the hashing inputs. This would reduce
the chances of accidentally using the wrong order of array elements. On the downside, however, the
Canonical JSON serialisation for objects is significantly more complex than for arrays. Overall, this
would likely result in a higher chance of implementation errors.

## Security considerations

### Kicking users from the SFU on room leave

> Since MatrixRTC sessions are tied to Matrix rooms, servers should to take care that client connections

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Since MatrixRTC sessions are tied to Matrix rooms, servers should take care that client connections
```

Reviewer 4: a836184

> to the SFU don't exceed past the point where a user leaves the associated room. This is important

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
to the SFU don't exceed past the point where a user leaves the associated Matrix room. This is important
```

Reviewer 4: ee2ba76

  * `slot_id` — required `string`: the slot ID from the `m.rtc.member` event.  
  * `openid_token` — required `object`: the verbatim OpenID token response obtained from the 
    [Client-Server API](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.11/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3useruseridopenidrequest_token).  
  * `member` — required `object`: the contents of the `member` field from the `m.rtc.member` event.
  * `delay_id` — required `string`: the delayed event id of the MatrixRTC member leave event.
  * `delay_timeout` — required `string`: number of positive non-zero milliseconds the homeserver
    should wait before sending the MatrixRTC member leave event. Clients SHOULD not use values smaller
    than 1 hour to avoid unnecessarily frequent `/reset`s of the delayed event. Service implementations
    MAY reject requests with a timeout below 1 hour with `M_BAD_JSON`.
  * `delay_cs_api_url` — required `string`: The Matrix client-server API as used by the client. This
    is required because publishing the [.well-known document](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#well-known-uris)
    for auto-discovery is not mandatory. Hence, there is, in general, no way to know how to access a

>     server's CS-API given its server name.

Reviewer 4: There is a potential injection problem here because the client can cause the server to hit more or less arbitrary endpoints and IPs by crafting a malicious URL.

Additionally, the service should verify the server's support for delay events using `/versions`.

Reviewer 4: Resolved in 30ea61cc072e905c4da2ff83077f3acf432b8b53.

```http
POST /livekit/jwt/delegate_delayed_leave HTTP/1.1
Host: matrix-rtc.example.com
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "room_id": "!tDLCaLXijNtYcJZEey:example.com",
  "slot_id": "the_id",
  "openid_token": {
    "access_token": "FPkexLLvKbAHKclQhpvgfWxx",
    "expires_in": 3600,
    "matrix_server_name": "matrix.example.com",
    "token_type": "Bearer"
  },
  "member": {
    "id": "xyzABCDEF10123",
    "claimed_device_id": "DEVICEID",
    "claimed_user_id": "@user:matrix.example.com"
  },
  "delay_id": "1234567890",
  "delay_timeout": "7200000",
  "delay_cs_api_url": "https://matrix-client.matrix.org/"
}
```

##### Successful response

The service MUST only maintain a single delegated event per `room_id`, `slot_id`,
`member` and MXID (as determined by verifyng the OpenID token). Requests to delegate
a different `delay_id` MUST invalidate earlier delegations for the same parameters.

If the delegation request is successful, an HTTP `200 OK` response is returned with
`Content-Type: application/json`. The response body contains an empty JSON object
for future extension.

Example response:
```http
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{}
```

> Once the LiveKit SFU Authorisation Service observes the client's SFU connection, identified by

Reviewer 4: @gewitternacht remarked that it's not obvious how the service can do this.

> How does "Once the LiveKit SFU Authorisation Service observes the client's SFU connection, identified by ..." work? How can the Authorisation Service observe this?

The LiveKit SFU supports web hooks to notify external services of events. In this case, the SFU needs to be configured to trigger a web hook on the authorization service. The service can use the data passed in the hook to figure out if a participant has connected or disconnected from the SFU.

This should probably land in the proposal text to help understanding.

Reviewer 4: Webhooks are mentioned in the proposal text now.

chances of accidentally using the wrong order of array elements. On the downside, however, the
Canonical JSON serialisation of objects is significantly more complex than for arrays. Overall,
this would likely result in a higher chance of implementation errors.

### Combination of token request and delegation

Instead of using separate endpoints, the token request and the delegation of the delayed disconnect
event could be combined in a single endpoint. This creates a race condition, however. As per
[MSC4143](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4143), the disconnect event
carries a relation to the associated join event. This means a client would have to send its join
event before requesting an SFU token. The associated Livekit room will only be created when the
token is requested though. As a result, a client on another homeserver could attempt to connect to
the SFU in the meantime. Since the Livekit room doesn't yet exist, this would result in an error.
Separating the endpoints avoids this issue.

Additionally, a joint endpoint introduces the problem of having to handle the case where one of
the two operations succeeds but the other fails.

> ## Security considerations

Reviewer 4: @BillCarsonFr said:

> We should also add some text in Security consideration around authenticity.
>
> The livekit uses s-frame for media encryption, and this does not offer per-sender authentication of media frames.
>
> That means that I can take your encyption key, and encrypt another stream with it, and colludes with the SFU to spoof your stream
>
> https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-sframe-enc-04.html#name-no-per-sender-authenticatio
>
> At least we could say, as per the [Secure Frame (sframe) spec recommandation,](https://sframe-wg.github.io/sframe/draft-ietf-sframe-enc.html#name-key-management-2) in order to provide "Forward Secrecy", the matrix key rotate keys when new clients joins or leaves a call

Reviewer 4: Applied in e2955da598a49f6fffab9bdf6e81e6bea72ba9af

For example:
```json5
["@user:matrix.example.com","DEVICEID","abcd12345"]
```

Any deviation (e.g. additional whitespace or different encoding) will result in a different hash 
and is therefore non-compliant.

### LiveKit room alias

The name of a LiveKit room is referred to as the **LiveKit alias** (`livekit_alias`). The alias MUST
be globally unique and dependent on a given MatrixRTC slot in a Matrix room. A minimal
implementation that ensures a baseline of pseudonymity is given by the
[unpadded base64 encoding](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/appendices/#unpadded-base64) of the SHA-256
hash of the JSON serialization of an array containing the Matrix `room_id` and the `slot_id`, i.e.  
`base64(SHA256(JSON.serialize([room_id, slot_id])))`, where `JSON.serialize` is the canonical JSON
serialization defined [above](#canonical-json-serialization).

For improved metadata protection, the `livekit_alias` SHOULD be derived as
`base64(SHA256(JSON.serialize([room_id, slot_id, truly_random_bits])))`, where the `truly random bits`
are maintained by the LiveKit SFU authorisation service. This approach enhances pseudonymity but

> requires the service to be **stateful** in order to manage and persist the random bits.

Reviewer 4: @gewitternacht remarked that this doesn't make it clear if the `truly_random_bits` are ever rotated or not. Ideally they should be rotated _between_ sessions. So once everyone disconnected, the service can rotate the salt so that the next call in the Matrix room will end up in a different LiveKit room even if the slot ID remains unchangend. The LiveKit SFU provides a webhook call that fires once a room becomes empty.

Reviewer 4: This is addressed in the proposal text now.

Host: matrix-rtc.example.com
Content-Type: application/json

{}
```

It then starts a timer corresponding to the specified `delay_timeout`. The timer is periodically
restarted while the client remains connected with sufficient headroom (e.g., 80% of `delay_timeout`) to
 ensure the restart occurs well before `delay_timeout` expires. If the SFU detects that the client has
disconnected before the timer is restarted, the Authorisation Service MUST trigger the `disconnect`
event by sending the following request to the homeserver:

```http
POST /_matrix/client/v1/delayed_events/{delay_id}/send HTTP/1.1
Host: matrix-rtc.example.com
Content-Type: application/json

{}
```

This ensures that the MatrixRTC membership state remains accurate and consistent, even in the
presence of network interruptions or client crashes.

Implementations SHOULD resolve the location of the client-server API by using [.well-known discovery]
for the `matrix_server_name` supplied in the OpenID token. If the resolution is performed when processing
the `/delegate_delayed_leave` request, resolution failures MUST result in the request being rejected
with 400 / `M_BAD_JSON`.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

[.well-known discovery]: https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#well-known-uris

```

Canonical JSON serialisation of objects is significantly more complex than for arrays. Overall,
this would likely result in a higher chance of implementation errors.

### Combination of token request and delegation

Instead of using separate endpoints, the token request and the delegation of the delayed disconnect
event could be combined in a single endpoint. This creates a race condition, however. As per
[MSC4143](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4143), the disconnect event
carries a relation to the associated join event. This means a client would have to send its join
event before requesting an SFU token. The associated Livekit room will only be created when the
token is requested though. As a result, a client on another homeserver could attempt to connect to
the SFU in the meantime. Since the Livekit room doesn't yet exist, this would result in an error.
Separating the endpoints avoids this issue.

Additionally, a joint endpoint introduces the problem of having to handle the case where one of
the two operations succeeds but the other fails.

## Security considerations

> ### Resource usage

Reviewer 4: @gewitternacht remarked that we may also want to consider adding rate limiting as a further mitigation.

Reviewer 4: Fixed in 29643a5fc187a825fd5ba72af670c94dce72b318.
